Yaml format description (#53)
FamilySearch/GEDCOM.io: _pages/yaml-file-format.md

---
title: YAML description format
permalink: /terms/format
sidebar:
  nav: "tools"
...

# YAML descriptions

This page documents the organization of YAML documents delivered at the URIs of the standard tags in the FamilySearch GEDCOM 7 specification and the gedcom.io extension tag registry. The YAML documents are not part of the standard itself, and while the intent is that they remain stable and usable in the long term, if a valid reason arises they may be changed independently of the versioning process.

YAML documents in this form are used to define

- Structure types

> - Enumeration values

Reviewer: Question raised last meeting: should we have a YAML for an enumeration _type_?

| `substructures` | `map` of *uri* to *card* | `structure` | |
| `superstructures` | `map` of *uri*\* to *card* | `structure` | |
| `type` | `str` from a set listed here | all | |
| `uri` | *uri* | all | |
| `used by` | `seq` of *uri* | `enumeration` | |

\* `superstructures` (only) permits the string "`HEAD psuedostructure`" as if it were a URI

In the above table,

- *stdTag* means a `str` matching production `stdTag`
- *extTag* means a `str` matching production `extTag`
- *tag* means a `str` matching production `tag`
- *uri* means a `str` that is a URI
- *lang* means a `str` in the datatype Language
- *type* means one of the following:
    - `null`
    - a `str` that is the URI of a datatype
    - a `str` that is the URI of a structure type delimited by `@` characters
    - the specific `str` "`Y|<NULL>'"
- *card* means one of the following four `str`: "`{0:1}`", "`{0:M}`", "`{1:1}`", or "`{1:M}`"

Notes about specific items follow:

- `calendars` is a list (in no particular order) of the URIs of calendars that use this month.
    
    The list may be incomplete, as a new calendar might be defined that uses an existing month.

> - `descriptions` is a list (in no particular order) of descriptions of the concept the YAML document is defining. Descriptions may be given in any language; it is recommended that at least one English-language description be included.

Reviewer: Where is the IANA language tag that identifies what language a description is in?

    
    Descriptions are generally programmer-centric; for user-centric text, see `label` and `explanation`

- `documentation` may provide one or more external URLs where additional documentation can be found. If there is no such URL, this entry should be omitted.

- `enumeration values` is used when the `payload` is <https://gedcom.io/terms/v7/type-Enum> or <https://gedcom.io/terms/v7/type-List#Enum> and provides a list of URIs of enumeration values supported by the structure.

    The listed URIs needn't identify only enumeration values:
    some structures explicitly enumerate other concepts,
    such as <https://gedcom.io/terms/v7/SOUR-EVEN> enumerating even types.

    The list may be incomplete, as a new enumeration values might be defined that may be included in existing structures.
    

>     > **Question**: should we change this to a list of URIs instead of its current mapping from tag to URI, removing the chance that an incorrect tag is placed in the entry?

Reviewer: Probably yes

> - `explanation` provides recommended detailed descriptions to show to users, potentially in several languages.

Reviewer: is there an associated IANA language tag?

    Explanations are user-centric; for programmer-centric explanations of the concept, see `description`.
    
    Explanations may be lengthy; for brief text to use in UI elements, see `label`.

- `extension tags` are provided in-order, with the most-preferred tag first.

    Standard structures may have an `extension tags` entry to list *fully compatible* extensions that predated the standard and can be converted to the `standard tag` without any other modification.

> - `label` provides recommended brief names or labels to show to users, potentially in several languages.

Reviewer: Is there an associated IANA language tag?

    *x* may be a substructure of *y* if
    either *x*'s `superstructures` includes *y* 
    or *y*'s `substructures` includes *x*.
    
    The cardinality of a substructure/superstructure relationship must be the same if it is listed in both a `substructures` entry and a  superstructures` entry.
    
    If `superstructures` is an empty `map`, then the structure is a record and must not appear in any other structure's `substructures`.

- `type` is one of the following values:

    | `type` | YAML describes |
    |--------|---------|
    | `structure`   | a structure type   |
    | `enumeration` | an enumeration value |
    | `calendar`    | a calendar |
    | `month`       | month in some calendar |
    | `datatype`    | payload datatype |
    | `uri`         | another URI of general interest, such as a known `EXID`.`TYPE |

- `uri` is the canonical URI of the concept the YAML document describes.
    
    In general this will not be the same as the URL of the document that describes it; for example the document with URL <https://gedcom.io/terms/v7/type-List.html> describes the datatype with URI `https://gedcom.io/terms/v7/type-List`.
    

>     > **Question**: How (if at all) should we handle cases where two implementers create distinct URIs for the same concept?

Reviewer: in opinion: we treat them as if they are different concepts

- `used by` lists structure types that are known to use this concepts as an enumeration value.
    

>     The list may be incomplete, as a new structure type might be defined re-uses and existing enumeration value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The list may be incomplete, as a new structure type might be defined that re-uses an existing enumeration value.
```

>     > **Question**: Should <https://gedcom.io/terms/v7/CHR> have a `used by` entry with <https://gedcom.io/terms/v7/NO> and <https://gedcom.io/terms/v7/SOUR-EVEN> in the list? If not, is there another way to denote that relationship? If so, should we rename "`used by`" to a more descriptive phrase like "`enumerated by`" or "`enumeration value of`"?

Reviewer: my opinion: rename to "value of" or "enumeration value of"
